## scripts and notebooks for Micro-C, ChIP-seq, ATAC-seq, and RNA-seq data analysis (revision analysis included)
### dependency and version control
<li>Python==3.8, R==4.1</li>
<li>Micro-C analysis: Galore (version 0.6.6), BWA (version 0.7.17-r1188), pairtools (version 1.0.0), COOLER (version 0.9.1), JUICER (version 1.22.01), peakachu (downloaded at July 2023), BedTools (version 2.31.0), pybedtools (version 0.9.1), AdaLiftOver (version 1.0.0), hicrep python (https://github.com/dejunlin/hicrep)</li>
<li>RNA-seq analysis: Galore (version 0.6.6), STAR (version 2.7.9a), deepTools (version 3.3.1), SamTools (version 1.16.1), DESeq2 (R package, version 1.32.0), fgsea (R package, version 1.18.0), gseapy (Python package, version 1.0.6)</li>
<li>ChIP-seq and ATAC-seq analysis: CHIPs pipeline (https://github.com/liulab-dfci/CHIPS), DANPOS2, BedTools (version 2.31.0), pybedtools (Python package, version 0.9.1), pyBigWig (Python package, version 0.3.20)</li>

### Installation
The script can be run on a normal computer with enough RAM. However, we recommend using the high-performance computing server with Linux operating system as it can provide enough computig resource. These software can be installed by either one of the four approaches:
<li>1. anaconda, for example, Galore can be installed from anaconda at https://anaconda.org/bioconda/trim-galore</li>
<li>Python packages can be installed from "pip install" command lines</li>
<li>R packages can be installed Bioconductor using the BiocManager::install() function</li>
<li>[BWA](https://github.com/lh3/bwa), [JUICER](https://github.com/aidenlab/juicer), [CHIPs](https://f1000research.com/articles/10-517), [DANPOS2](https://sites.google.com/site/danposdoc/) can be installed from their home page.</li>

### Downloading the data
<p>The raw data for RNA-seq, Micro-C, ChIP-seq, and ATAC-seq data has been deposited to NCBI GEO repository under accession numbers:</p>
| Accession	| Title	| Samples |
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| GSE301359	| RNA-seq human | 9 |
| GSE301360	| CUT&Run mouse | 10 |
| GSE301361	| PRO-seq mouse | 6 |
| GSE301366	| ChIP-seq mouse, CTCF, SMC1, MED1 | 24 |
| GSE301368	| ChIP-seq human | 10 |
| GSE301370	| Micro-C human | 12 |
| GSE261410	| ATAC-Seq mouse | 6 |
| GSE261412	| ChIP-Seq mouse, H3K27ac, H3K4me3, H2AZ | 24 |
| GSE261413	| RNA-Seq mouse | 9 |
| GSE261416	| Micro-C mouse | 24 |

### RNA-seq
<li>RNAseq_process/RNAseq_data_preprocessing_cmd.sh</li>
<p>This a example for bash command lines for RNA-seq data processing, including read mapping, read counting, generating bigwig, calculating FPKM and TPM for normalized expression index. The count matrix will be used for differential expression analysis in DESeq2 (a R package). This task is expected to finish within 1hr per sample</p>

<li>RNAseq_process/diffexp_analysis.R</li>
<p>The R script to perform differential expression analysis using DESeq2, following by gene ontology analysis and gene set enrichment ananlysis (GSEA). The input for this script is the count matrix and comparison design. This task is expected to finish within 20mins per analysis.</p>

<li>RNAseq_process/diffexp_run.sh</li>
<p>a example bash command line to excute diffexp_analysis.R</p>

<li>RNAseq_process/comparison_design.csv</li>
<p>a example of comparison design in our study, the 1-labeled samples versus 0-labeled samples in the comparison</p>


### Micro-C
<li>MicroC/MicroC_data_preprocessing_cmd.sh</li>
<p>This a example for bash command lines for Micro-C data processing, including read mapping, read counting, generating BAM file and read pair file. The read pair file will be used in the downstream analysis for generating hic/cool file, the TAD/compartment/loop analysis will be based on hic/cool file. This task is expected to finish within 2 days per sample.</p>

<li>MicroC/MicroC_hic_cool_TAD_compartment_loop.sh</li>
<p>This a example for bash command lines for Micro-C data processing based on pair files generated by data preprocessing, including filtering out low-quality read pairs, generating hic/cool files, calling TAD domans and compartment, loop identification. The read pair file will be used in the downstream analysis for generating hic/cool file, the TAD/compartment/loop analysis will be based on hic/cool file. This task is expected to finish within a half day per sample.</p>

<li>MicroC/compartment.py</li>
<p>A python script to perform compartment analysis based on cool files using cooltools.</p>

### ChIP-seq and ATAC-seq
<li>ChIP_ATAC_process/chips_run.sbatch</li>
<p>an example command line for excute CHIPs pipeline for ChIP-seq or ATAC-seq data proprocessing. [CHIPs](https://f1000research.com/articles/10-517) is snakemake pipeline for chromatin data processing. This will produce needed outputs for downstream analysis, including mapped reads, ChIP or ATAC signal, quality control results, etc. This task is expected to finish within 1 day per sample.</p>

<li>ChIP_ATAC_process/chips_config_for_ATAC.yaml</li>
<p>An example config file for ATAC-seq data processing, required for CHIPs pipeline</p>

<li>ChIP_ATAC_process/chips_config_for_ChIPseq.yaml</li>
<p>An example config file for ChIP-seq data processing, required for CHIPs pipeline</p>

<li>ChIP_ATAC_process/chips_metasheet_for_ATAC.csv</li>
<p>An example metasheet table for ATAC-seq data processing, required for CHIPs pipeline</p>

<li>ChIP_ATAC_process/chips_metasheet_for_ChIPseq.csv</li>
<p>An example metasheet table for ChIP-seq data processing, required for CHIPs pipeline</p>

<li>ChIP_ATAC_process/danpos_run.sh</li>
<p>An example for running [DANPOS2](https://sites.google.com/site/danposdoc/) software to call peaks for ChIP-seq and ATAC-seq data</p>

### Python codes for Downstream analysis
<li>Compartment_TAD_analysis_03012024.py</li>
<p>The python script for Compartment and TAD downstream analysis using the outputs from proprocessing steps</p>

<li>Mouse_MicroC_ChIP_updated_2025.py</li>
<p>The python script for mouse loop analysis and integration with and between ChIP-seq (H2AZ, H3K27ac, CTCF, SMC1, and MED1), ATAC-seq, and RNA-seq using the outputs from proprocessing steps</p>

<li>human_MicroC_analysis_2025.py</li>
<p>The python script for human loop analysis and integration with and between ChIP-seq (H2AZ, H3K27ac), RNA-seq, and GWAS data using the outputs from proprocessing steps</p>

<li>exp_analysis_02292024.py</li>
<p>The python script for RNA-seq data downstream analysis using the outputs from proprocessing steps</p>

<li>PROseq_and_eRNA_analysis_2025.py</li>
<p>The python script for PRO-seq data downstream analysis using the outputs from proprocessing steps. The PRO-seq data was preprocessed by core facility using their pipeline at (https://github.com/AdelmanLab/NIH_scripts)</p>
<li>Noted that all python scripts above were run in jupyter notebooks. If reproduce our analysis using these script, it is highly recommended to excute it block-by-block using jupyter notebook following comments annonated in the file. The file path in the script remains change to the new folder structure. </li>

### Supporting python, R, or bash script for Downstream analysis
<li>replicateCorrelation.sh</li>
<p>A bash script to compute correlations between Micro-C replicates using hicrep software taking COOL files as input.</p>

<li>homer_eRNA_call.sh</li>
<p>A bash script to call eRNA peaks on PRO-seq data, bedgraph file of 5' signal was used as input.</p>

<li>adaliftover_run2.R</li>
<p>A R script to lift over mouse loop anchor into human genome using AdaLiftOver software by considering both epigenomics and sequence similarity.</p>

<li>download_human_snp_LD.py</li>
<p>A python script to download LD associations for SNPs using LDlink API</p>

<li>LD_expand.py</li>
<p>A python script for the LD expansion analysis using lead SNPs in a window around loop anchor center. The output of this script will be used into GWAS analysis in human_MicroC_analysis_2025.py</p>

